Miscellaneous Notes on the Classes of Tantra and Pith Instructions of the Great Chariots of the Practice Lineage in the Land of Snows The Four Tenet Systems Knowing the six topics in that way, one then trains in the views of the four tenet systems. Moreover, there are three vehicles: the Śrāvakayāna, the Pratyekabuddhayāna, and the Bodhisattvayāna. The four tenet systems are Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, Madhyamaka, and Cittamātra. They are presented according to the principle that the first two belong to the Hīnayāna of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas and the latter two belong to the Mahāyāna path of bodhisattvas. That is equivalent to how the four tenet systems are posited elsewhere according to the path and result of the three vehicles. According to the Vaibhāṣikas and Sautrāntikas, knowable objects are subsumed into five foundations: ...appearing forms, primary minds, their attendant mental factors, non-associated formations, and unconditioned phenomena. Although their number and arrangement are comparable, the Vaibhāṣikas assert these five foundations to be truly established while the Sautrāntikas assert that only form and mind are substantially existent, since the three types of unconditioned phenomena transcend causes and conditions (without substance); non-associated formations are merely imputed existents projected upon the temporary phenomena of forms, primary minds, and mental factors; and mental factors are not a different substance from primary minds. Since these two schools assert that external objects exist, [they are called] the two schools that propound external objects. Moreover, although Cittamātrins do not assert that external objects exist, they still assert that the thoroughly established nature exists. These three schools are therefore posited to be proponents of true existence. The ways in which these two schools posit the two realities are as follows. The Vaibhāṣika position is as stated in the Abhidharmakośa: That which is not mentally engaged in (of the form of that previous mind), When destroyed (as if by a hammer) and mentally eliminated, Seemingly exists, like water in a vase (droplets being scattered). The ultimately existent are different from this. The Sautrāntika position is as stated in the Pramāṇavārttika: Whatever performs a function (like a pillar) Is here said to be ultimately existent (as a collection of indivisible particles). Everything else (imagined phenomena lacking characteristics, like a so-called "pillar") exists as relative reality. They (the ultimate, indivisible particles) are explained to be specifically and generally characterized (as a collection of indivisible particles called a pillar, which is a phenomenon that relatively exists as an imputation). Nevertheless, although that is the case for the Followers of Logic, the Followers of Scripture do not posit the two realities any differently from the Vaibhāṣikas. As for the tenet system of Cittamātra, the Laṅkāvatārasūtra states: The entities of the five dharmas, nature, and The eight consciousnesses, and The two types of selflessness Comprise all of the Mahāyāna teachings. These are constrained by the explanations of the four Dharma seals. The five dharmas are as follows: Name, reason, concept, and Authentic wisdom, and suchness. Name and reason are included in the imaginary nature. The phenomena contained in the imputed duality of apprehender and apprehended, the other-dependent nature, comprise seeming reality. Authentic wisdom and suchness are self-aware, self-cognizant consciousness that is without (like the horns of a rabbit) the duality of apprehender and apprehended. They are the thoroughly established nature and ultimate reality. The three natures are the imaginary, other-dependent, and thoroughly established. Moreover, there are the enumerated imaginary nature and the imaginary nature in which characteristics are terminated. There are also the pure and impure dependent natures, as well as the unchanging thoroughly established nature and the unmistaken thoroughly established nature. These make six. The eightfold collection of consciousness is as mentioned above. The two types of selflessness are the selflessness of phenomena and of persons. If one does not find them due to the way in which they are not the same or different, they are definitely non-existent. If there were an established basis for them, they would necessarily be the same or different from each other. Although Buddhists assert the selflessness of persons, they also assert a presentation of the two realities on the basis of phenomena. Additionally, they assert a gross seeming [reality] and subtle ultimate [reality] in accordance with the tenet systems. Moreover, because they are dependently designated, in order, [one finds] the tenet system that posits objects to be the ultimate for the lower vehicles, [and] the logic of the higher tenets, which later asserts that there is another, more subtle ultimate. The tenet system of the Mādhyamikas determines that all phenomena are birthless through five great reasonings: (1) the investigation into causes, the (sharp) "vajra splinters" on the four possibilities, argues that an ear of grain does not arise from itself, and so on; (2) the investigation into results, "the refutation of existent and non-existent effects," argues that if a fruit already existed in its seed, it could not be born, and so on; (3) the investigation into both, "the refutation of the four possibilities for arising," argues that one cause does not give rise to multiple results and so forth, as well as the rest of the four possibilities; (4) the investigation into the essence, "neither one nor many," argues that if there is an established basis, it would necessarily be either one or many, and that is logically determined to not be the case; and (5) the "reasoning of great dependent origination" is that things do not arise from their own essence because they arise in dependence on other causes and conditions. In summary, the non-Buddhists and Buddhists debate whether the self of a person exists or not. Vaibhāṣika and Sautrāntika debate whether two, four, or three are truly established or not. The Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna debate whether external objects are truly established or not. Madhamaka and Cittamātra debate whether the thoroughly established nature is truly established or not. Accordingly, among the Buddhists there is no one who does not assert the selflessness of persons. There is no Mahāyāna practitioner who does not assert the selflessness of phenomena. There is no Mādhyamika who does not assert freedom from conceptual constructs. In particular, while training in prajñā, if logic cannot find there to be no object, fixation cannot be destroyed; it is like, for instance, how one might think that there is no thief behind a mountain pass but one is caught off guard when one later encounters a thief there. Thus, one must understand nonexistence through expert investigation. Regarding the selflessness of persons, there is the self-clinging of thinking "I" and then freshly imputed, inconceivably wrong concepts invented by non-Buddhists that come along with it. Something separate from the looker is not found, no matter where one endeavors to find it, such as in the five aggregates and so forth. The very mind of the one looking also disappears in an instant of time, so the "I" is not found. Afterward, one repeats that there is no "I" that is privately established as something other than the mere term "I," an imputation devoid of characteristics, in relation to the collection of the five aggregates. Regarding the selflessness of phenomena, one may posit that on one particle, there are particles in four directions. Then, if one divides the middle into a particle, there is not [any foundational or fundamental] part to be found. If the former and later moment of thought do not meet, whatever is thought of by the past [mind] would not be known afterwards. If they do meet, it would follow that past and future thoughts exist in the middle thought. A thought also has no parts if one cuts its smallest duration down the middle. Because of the selflessness of phenomena, it is empty. The appearance of phenomena left over from that is the support for individual karma. Phenomena are the appearances of the apprehender and apprehended of relative reality. On top of that, selflessness is ultimate dharmatā. The sixfold collection of consciousness and the primary minds and mental factors arise through the latent tendencies existent in the continuum of the ālaya. Because of this, appearances are ascertained to be mind. As one investigates thoughts in the context of meditative absorption, they are dissected as selfless. Furthermore, as those thoughts are empty, recollecting and settling upon the mere knowing that they are empty is the ascertainment that mind is empty. Additionally, the knowing that transcends the intellect and is free from conceptual constructs is ascertained as emptiness awareness. In terms of a pith instruction, anything that one is conscious of or comes to know and so on out of the unimpeded state where the mind abides is genuine vipaśyanā. Abiding vividly in an experience of the aspect of clarity of such mind (also called mental stillness) is śamatha. The ethics of the three trainings of the path are to not transgress the disciplines of pratimokṣa, the bodhisattvas, and Mantrayāna as one has committed to them. Concerning the samādhi of śamatha, there are nine methods of mentally settling in that: The nine are settling, continuously settling, and repeatedly settling (through mindfulness not engaging in distraction, like pulling the reins of a horse), Closely settling (distraction having come to an end), taming through settling (being enthusiastic due to recollecting its benefits), pacifying (drowsiness and agitation), Completely pacifying (other thoughts of the five poisons), one-pointedness (concentrating by means of effort), And resting in evenness (relaxing after concentrating). There are five faults that are discordant with samādhi: The five are laziness (sluggishness and being attached to bad actions), forgetting the instructions (the focal support), Dullness (a lax mode of apprehension) and agitation (being drunk with desire), Underapplication (not concentrating enough), and overapplication (concentrating too much). There are eight mental applications for abandoning those: (In samādhi,) faith, aspiration (interest), effort, pliancy (which causes enjoyment), Mindfulness (not forgetting), attentiveness (being careful, as if near the edge of a cliff), attention, and equanimity (giving up effort)... The training in prajñā is to know all phenomena to be mere dependent origination. Dependent origination is twelvefold: (1) ignorance or total delusion; (2) the three formations of the three doors; (3) the six or eight collections of consciousness; (4) feelings of happiness, suffering, and neutrality; (5) the cravings of the desire, form, and formless realms; (6) the four types of appropriation, that is, desire, view, moral discipline and austerity, and expounding a self; (7) existence, that is, the desire, form, and formless realms; (8) the twelve sense spheres; (9) the individual acquisition of the aggregates of the type one is born into, including the individual acquisition of the constituents, the individual acquisition of the sense spheres, and the production of the fully formed power of the life force; and (10) old age and death, with white hair, wrinkles, baldness, and so forth, and extreme old age, while death is the cessation of the power of life force. In summary, the relative reality of objects in the phenomenal world-everything that arises from the collection of causes and conditions-is like the moon in water. The ultimate reality of dharmatā-which is freed from all the proliferations of causes and conditions, and is beyond the intellect-is like space. From the state of knowing that, in a state of ordinary mind that is free of fabrication, realize the amazing path of the middle way, the union of the two realities that is not bound by the rope of mindfulness and conceptualization of the antidotes. This was also collected from the notes. Sarva mangalam. 
